Purpose and Disclaimer
----------------------

The XOA_2009 is a contractual agreement (license) that has been created for use
with software intended for cost free distribution to owner's of the olpc XO-1 or
subsequent devices, that specifically considers the needs of third world recipients.
The agreement may additionally be used for creative content of any kind.

XOA stands for eXtended Open Agreement.  The XOA_2009 may be applied to a creative
work in three variations designated as follows:
  XOA_2009  (pronounced zoa):  commercial exclusions are applied
  XOAR_2009 (pronounced zoar): commercial exclusions are restricted
  XOAW_2009 (pronounced zow):  commercial exclusions are waived
This agreement, XOA_2009, is itself a creative work licensed under XOAW_2009.

The author of this agreement is Nameless Faceless Programmer, and is in no manner,
in the present or past, formally affiliated with the One Laptop Per Child (olpc)
organization.

Introduction
------------

This section establishes the context of and need for XOA_2009.  The specific license
provisions are given under the subsequent heading labeled XOA_2009.

Intellectual property law, be it patent, copyright, or trademark law, is intended to
bestow certain benefits to, and protect certain rights of, inventors, authors, or
creators (herein after referred to as creators) in order to encourage them to share
the fruit of their labors for the benefit of the broader community.  Ironically, the
smaller social structures in that community in which many creators find themselves
entangled usually require creators to surrender those benefits and rights in return
for some minimal consideration, typically one dollar together with the putative
privilege of remaining a member of and participant in those social structures.

The mechanism of surrender is the transfer of ownership of the intellectual property
to the smaller social structure.  This transfer is, in effect, an exclusive license
that the creator awards to his or her umbrella organization.

The principal right intellectual property law awards to the creator or subsequent
owner is the right to exclude.  Intellectual property law provides mechanisms for a
creator to lay claim to some well defined and limited creative domain, together with
the authority to exclude others from that domain at will.  The mechanism by which
others may be preferentially included in or merely permitted to enter the creative
domain is called a license, which is a form of contractual agreement.  The terms
imposed by a license are entirely at the discretion of the owner of the intellectual
property, who is, initially, its creator.

Commercial licenses are typically designed to transform the right to exclude into
monetary benefit accruing to the owner of the intellectual property, who, as noted
above, is typically not the creator of the intellectual property.  In the realm of
commercial software, the principal means used to protect the pecuniary interests of
the licensor is to exclude the licensee from all rights save the right to use the
software as delivered, in highly limited installation circumstances.  Commercial
licenses therefore address the needs of the owner of the intellectual property to the
exclusion of the needs of creators and users of the intellectual property.

In order to provide some relief from this imbalance of rights, there has arisen the
concept of open source licensing.  The inaugural example of this type of license was
Richard Stallman's GNU Public License (GPL), now administered by the Free Software
Foundation as GPL 2.0 and GPL 3.0.  Many similar variations on these ideas are in use,
of which the Python License is most germane to the immediate purpose.

In these licenses, the right to exclude is used, abstractly, to protect the rights of
the original creator and some of the rights of the licensees, by excluding from the
license all whose purpose would in some way serve to exclude subsequent licensees and
creators from the benefits bestowed upon the original creator by the larger community,
or the rights bestowed by the original creator to inaugural licensees.  All others,
that is those whose purpose is altruistic, are implicitly included by the license.

Open source licenses are therefore recursive, a truth that was made explicitly clear
in Stallman's original GPL, and has since been obscured or lost entirely by many
licenses, including the GPL.  It is the nature of the practice of law that the right
to exclude is always expressed indirectly by designating specific, unambiguous
inclusions, together with some refining specific, unambiguous exclusions, all other
cases being implicitly excluded.  An open source license attempts to use this
cumbersome practice to express altruistic inclusion in a social milieu that caters to
the needs of selfish exclusion.

There are two defects in the implementation of these earlier licenses that encumber
these altruistic purposes in the present case, one of a general nature, and one
specific to the client community of the XO, namely, third world children.  It is the
purpose of the XOA_2009 to resolve these defects.

Specifically, prior licenses fail to protect the right of creators of derivative
works to, at some critical point of overwhelming creative contribution, take full
ownership of their derivative work, thereafter requiring only acknowledgement of the
original work and creator as inspirational to the derivative work.  This failure
becomes especially onerous when the client community comprises third world children.

Legal challenges to open source licenses have been largely predicated upon the
principle that the creator of an original work has no right to recursively impose
restrictions on control of the portions of a derivative work that are wholly original
to the creator of that derivative.  Open source licenses have responded to these
challenges in theory by requiring that wholly original derivative portions of a
creative work be cleanly separated from the ancestral work in order for derivative
creators to lay claim to the rights accruing to their original works.  The most
important right is the right to chose a different license that is more suitable for
the intended audience of the derivative work.  The right to create a well integrated
and efficient derivative is also impaired, which is contrary to the spirit of the
open source community.

In practice, licenses are frequently violated, with the creators of derivative works
relying on the unenforceability of all but the most egregious violations.  This
circumstance is especially unacceptable when the client community is third world
children.  One can hardly claim to be looking out for the best future interests of
those children, while encouraging them to independently and creatively alter software,
an act that has the potential for entangling them in quagmires of legal due process
with consequences about which they can have no genuine comprehension.  Nor can the
expectation that children blindly adopt the GPL or Python license be considered
selfless, when other possibilities may better serve the immediate and long term
interests of a child and their local community.  It is therefore necessary to
expressly protect the best interests of children by exempting them from liability.

In order to remedy the general defect, it is necessary to provide an escape mechanism
by which a derivative creator may lay claim of ownership to residual ancestral
portions of a work, giving only attribution to the original, provided the work
original to the derivative exceeds some benchmark percentage of the whole derivative
work.  Providing such an escape clause answers the primary legal challenge to open
source licenses very effectively.  In consideration of the privilege given by a
creator making source and design documents available, without which a derivative
would be very difficult or impossible to produce, the creator of the original work
requires apriori that the creator of a derivative meet certain standards of
originality as a condition of parting ways.

Since this condition is known to the creator of the derivative before hand, it is
enforcable.  If a potential creator of a derivative finds this condition unacceptable,
the potential creator is free not to accept the license and therefore not create the
derivative.  No unreasonable hardship is imposed by the license.  In summary, by
virtue of providing aid to derivative creators, the original creator has every right
to insist that derivative creators earn their release from contractual obligations by
doing the work, provided the terms of release are well defined apriori.

While effective, this escape mechanism introduces a modicum of ambiguity in the
judgement of what percentage of a work is original and how much is derivative.  While
such provisions are anathema to the legal community, they have precedent.  The most
notable exception to rigorous clarity in this context is the notion of a concept that
is "non-obvious to a person having ordinary skill in the art" adopted by patent law
as a metric for novelty.  In that same body of law, there is also ambiguity
introduced by excluding laws of nature and mathematical truths from patentability.

Arguably, all software expresses mathematical truths, yet when those truths are
merely a critical means in a larger process that performs some novel and useful
function, software has been found to be patentable, in much the same way that
constructs that harness laws of physics to useful end are patentable.  Historically,
these ambiguities have been resolved by litigation.

Following these precedents in patent law, a hypothetical person having ordinary skills
in the art of a work is assumed for the purpose of determining how much is original
to an ancestral work and how much is original to the derivative.  This convention has
the effect of making the license more open to those whose motives are true to the
values of the open source community, while simultaneously making it potentially more
litigious to those who would subvert altruistic values.

XOA_2009
--------

0) Definitions:

   Original work -
       is the fruit of some creative endeavor by an individual or organization
       together with the data and documents necessary to reproduce that work.

   Derivative work -
       is an original work that is an alteration, adaptation, or transformation
       of some other original work.

   Ancestral work -
       is an original work from which a derivative work has, in part, been created.

   Captive work -
       is a derivative work in which less than 62% of the work is the original work
       of the creator of the derivative, as judged by a person having ordinary skill
       in the arts germane to creation of the particular work under consideration.
       A captive work does not meet the standards for release from this license.

   Emancipated work -
       is a derivative work in which more than 62% of the work is the original work
       of the creator of the derivative, as judged by a person having ordinary skill
       in the arts germane to creation of the particular work under consideration.
       An emancipated work meets the standards for release from this license.  If an
       emancipated work is re-licensed under this license, it becomes, for the 
       purposes of this license, a work wholly original to the creator of the
       emancipated work.

   Manufactured work -
       is a verbatim reproduction of an original work.  In the case where the
       original work constitutes a design, a manufactured work is either a verbatim
       reproduction of the design itself or a specific realized instance of the
       design.

   Software -
       is a manufactured work that constitutes a design.  A specific installation,
       configuration, compilation, or instantiation of that software is a specific
       realized instance of the design.

   Work -
       is any of the above defined works.

   Creator -
       is an individual or organization that is responsible for the creation of
       some original work.

   Licensor -
       is an individual or organization that has adopted this license for some
       original work.

   Licensee -
       is an individual or organization subject to the terms of this license.

   License -
       is a contractual agreement between a licensor and licensee, and may refer
       either to this license or some other license.

   Manufacturing -
       is the act of reproducing an original work.  For the purposes of text, or
       graphics governed by this license, manufacturing means copying.  In the case
       where the original work constitutes a design, manufacturing means either
       copying the design itself or realizing the design as a specific instance.

   Distributing -
       is the act of making an original or manufactured work available to others.

1) Interpretation:

   For the purposes of interpreting the meaning and intent of the provisions of this
   License, the text under the preceding headings 'Purpose and Disclaimer' and
   'Introduction' is hereby incorporated by reference.

2) Stakeholders:

   This license constitutes a contractual agreement among the following stakeholders:

  a) The creator of an original work who has adopted this license for that work
  b) Users of works governed by this license
  c) Creators of works derived in part from works governed by this license
  d) Manufacturers of works governed in whole or in part by this license
  e) Distributors of works governed in whole or in part by this license

   This license establishes the rights, benefits, and responsibilities that accrue to
   each of these stakeholders.

3) Acceptance:

   The terms of this license are made binding by any of the following actions:

  a) Choosing to use this license for an original work
  b) Using a work governed by this license
  c) Creating a derivative work from a work governed by this license
  d) Manufacturing a work governed in whole or in part by this license
  e) Distributing a work governed in whole or in part by this license

   Adoption of this license is expressed by prominently displaying the text:
     "licensed under XOA_2009"
   in one or more places in a work, together with inclusion of the full text of
   this license with each manufacture of the work.

4) Licensee liability exemption:

   Children beneath the age of majority in their respective nations are exempt from
   ALL liability for violations of this license provided only that:

  a) When adults responsible for those children are informed in writing in their
     native language of any violation, they immediately put a stop to all violating
     activity and follow the procedure for coming into conformance that MUST be
     provided by the licensor as part of the written notification in order for that
     notification to be valid, and
  b) In the event the responsible adults willfully disregard notification of
     violations, they can only be held liable for violations committed after
     notification.  In no event can ANY child be held liable for ANY violations or
     for ANY direct, indirect, or consequential damages.

   In ALL cases, the burden of pursuit and rectification of any violations by
   children, including any legal fees and consequential damages, shall be born by
   the licensor.

5) Licensor liability exemption:

   The creator of an original work subject to this license can in no manner be held
   liable for any damages, direct, indirect, or consequential, resulting from the
   use, alteration, manufacture, or distribution of the work.

6) Non-commercial manufacturing and distribution:

   Creation and distribution of manufactured works as defined above is permitted
   under the terms of the Creative Commons license CC-BY-NC-ND version 3.0, the terms
   of which are hereby incorporated by reference.  See www.creativecommons.org for
   details.  Specifically, the complete text of XOA_2009 MUST be included unaltered
   in its original location in any manufactured or distributed work.

   Non-commercial manufacture and distribution of a specific instance of a design
   governed by this license is permitted provided that complete design data and
   documents, together with this license, are distributed with each specific
   manufactured instance.

7) Commercial manufacturing and distribution:

   Commercial manufacturing or distribution is permitted only with the written
   permission of the creator of a work governed by this license.  This permission
   may include additional requirements and restrictions.

   Commercial manufacture of a specific instance of a design governed by this
   license is permitted only with the written permission of the creator of a work
   governed by this license.  This permission may include additional requirements
   and restrictions.

   The creator of an original work may expressly waive written permission as part
   of a work, whereby that waiver, together with any additional requirements or
   restrictions incorporated in that waiver constitute written permission.  The
   presence of such a waiver is expressed by use of the following text describing
   the license:
     "licensed under XOAW_2009" in the case of unrestricted waiver, or
     "licensed under XOAR_2009" in the case of a waiver accompanied by additional
                                restrictions or requirements.

   The creator of a captive work may only give permission to commercially manufacture
   and distribute the captive work with the express permission of the creators of ALL
   ancestral works upon which the captive work is based.  This expression may be in
   the form of waivers.

   All permitted commercial manufacture and distribution of a specific instance of
   a design governed by this license MUST include complete design data and documents,
   together with this license, with each specific manufactured instance. 

8) Disclosure and promotion:

   The licensor, by adopting this license, agrees to fully disclose ALL design detail
   of a work that may be necessary to use, alter, manufacture or distribute the work.
   This design detail is considered part of any verbatim reproduction, and MUST be
   included as part of the work by any licensee who choses to manufacture or
   distribute the work, either as a whole, or as a realized instance of a design.

   The licensee, in turn agrees to refrain from using the name, likeness, reputation
   or other personally identifying information, tradenames, or trademarks belonging
   to the licensor in ANY promotional material, without prior written permission of
   the licensor.  Any implication that the licensor endorses any activities or
   products of the licensee is specifically prohibited. 

9) Naming:

   The creator of an original work is free to adopt any naming conventions of the
   creator's choosing for the purposes of promotion, distribution, or manufacture.
   For the purpose of licensing, however, the creator must adopt a name with the
   following format:
     Name_yyyymmdd
   Where 'Name' is a name uniquely identifying the original work, preferably one
   that has a clear relationship to the names used to promote, distribute, or
   manufacture the work.  'yyyymmdd' is a serial number expressing the date of
   release of the original work to the public.  'yyyy' designates the year, 'mm'
   designates the month, and 'dd' designates the day of the month.  When releases
   are less frequent, 'dd' or 'mm' may be omitted, e.g. XOA_2009 instead of
   XOA_200901 or XOA_20090101.

   A captive derivative work must adopt, for the purpose of licensing, a name with
   the following format:
     Name_Captive_yyyymmdd
   where 'Name' is the XOA_2009 license name of the ancestral work from which the
   derivative is principally derived, and Captive is a uniquely identifying name the
   creator of the derivative envisions using when the derivative work becomes
   emancipated.  For example, a captive derivative of this license might be named
   XOA_ZOA_2010, and be named ZOA_2011 once emancipated, if its creator chose to
   license under XOA_2009.

   These naming conventions are a service provided by the licensor to the licensee.
   They enable the licensee to easily determine freshness when comparing various
   original works or derivatives, and version sequence when comparing different
   revisions of a single original work in a completely unambiguous way.

10) Derivative works:

   In consideration of the privilege afforded to the licensee by the graciousness
   of a licensor providing full disclosure of design detail of a work, derivative
   works are permitted subject to the following terms:

  a) Captive works, as defined above:

    i) MUST be licensed under XOA_2009
   ii) MUST acknowledge ancestral works and creators

  b) Emancipated works as defined above:

    i) MUST acknowledge ancestral works and creators
   ii) MUST share and share alike: All design detail original to any ancestral
       work MUST remain publically available.  If this detail is intermingled
       with detail original to the derivative work, then that new detail MUST
       also be made publically available.
  iii) As much as 38% of ALL design detail of the emancipated work that its
       creator makes publically available, may be incorporated in ANY original
       or derivative work subject to this license, with no special permission,
       provided only that the work incorporating the design detail MUST
       acknowledge the emancipated work as the source of the design detail.
   iv) An emancipated work may subsequently be licensed under any license compatible
       with these terms that the creator of the emancipated work deems suitable.

   If a potential creator of a derivative work finds these conditions unacceptable,
   the potential creator is free to choose not to make a derivative work.

11) Irrevocability:

   A licensor may choose to use a subsequent revision of XOA_2009, e.g. XOA_2010, as
   a license for a revision of an original work.  By choosing to license an original
   work with this license, however, the creator of the work becomes subject to these
   terms.  In particular, the only option available for removing this license from
   revisions of the work is to create a derivative work that meets the standards of
   release from this license for emancipated works as defined above.

   In such a case, the derivative may be released as a wholly original work under any
   suitable license of the creator's choosing, just as might happen with any other
   creator's derivative emancipated work.

   The only distinction of such a derivative is that the creator of the derivative is
   the same as the creator of the original work.  As such, one additional privilege
   that is unique to this circumstance is available to the creator as licensor of the
   derivative: once the derivative work meets the standards for release from this
   license, the creator may revert the naming of the derivative to the naming of the
   ancestral works, effectively discontinuing the use of this license from the new
   and subsequent editions of the work.

   Ancestral versions of the work will, nevertheless, remain subject to the terms of
   this license, including any intervening versions of the derivative made available
   prior to meeting the standards for release from this license.

12) Non-exclusivity:

   The licensor may simultaneously license an original work under this and other
   licenses, provided that the other licensed works contain prominent notification
   that the work is also licensed under this license, and that the terms of this
   license must be observed.  In the event that the terms of an additional license
   conflict with this license, the more restrictive terms shall govern.

   This provision is useful for providing additional requirements and restrictions
   to a commercial licensee in an efficient manner.

13) Conveyance:

   The rights, benefits, and responsibilities that accrue to the creator of an
   original work governed by this license may be conveyed as an integral whole to
   another individual or legal entity by a written instrument, expressly including
   a last will and testament.

   Such a conveyance MUST be exclusive, and upon execution, the creator of the work
   so conveyed shall cease to be a stakeholder classified as a creator of the work.
   The recipient will correspondingly become a stakeholder bound by the terms of this
   license, just as the creator of the work was, and becomes for the purposes of this
   license the creator and licensor of the work.

   In the event that the creator of a work dies, in the case of an individual, or
   dissolves, in the case of an entity, without having made arrangements for the
   transfer of rights, benefits, and responsibilities, the work governed by this
   license shall enter the public domain and ALL of the provisions of this license
   shall subsequently become null and void regarding the governance of the work.
